What's the way to understand this
extraordinary situation that's been
building between the United States and
Venezuela in the last couple of months?
The Trump administration has carried out
military strikes on boats in the
Caribbean, which they say are carrying
drugs to the United States. There's also
an immense American military build-up in
the region, which has been escalating in
the last few days. Into that reality has
come the awarding of the Nobel Peace
Prize to the Venezuelan opposition
leader Maria Corina Machado.
I've been speaking to her for the show,
and she is a peace laureate who needs US
military pressure to help her achieve
her goals, which is ultimately the end
of the Maduro regime. That's part of the
complexity which I discuss with her. She
wants the regime gone, but how and when
that is achieved was very much a live
conversation as we spoke. You can hear
it next.
Thank you, Maria Corina Machado, for
taking the time. Your peace prize has
obviously increased awareness around the
world of the situation in Venezuela.
Help me understand first of all
how you live. What are the circumstances
in which you live at the moment? Can you
go out and be seen in public?
Well, thank you very much. I have to
remind everyone that this is a
recognition to a very long and painful
and and
impressive struggle of a society that
wants to live in peace and freedom.
A society that has been hurt
badly for a regime that has separated
our families and destroyed our country
in in every dimension. Um last year we
had an incredible event. We won an
election, a presidential election, by a
landslide under extreme unfair
conditions. And after that happened uh
the Maduro regime unleashed the worst
repression campaign in Venezuelan
history. I'm talking about thousands of
people that were, you know, detained,
tortured, disappeared, even children.
Women abused.
Everything. My our friends are
colleagues are either in in jail or have
to be
uh
asylees, uh in hiding, or have left the
country. So, um I was accused of
terrorism
by Nicolas Maduro, and uh
I had to to go into hiding.
It's almost 15 months. I am in absolute
isolation on my own.
Uh and uh well, of course, I I I I am
conscious that if if if they find me, uh
well, at the least they they would
disappear me. That's what they've said.
And what is the impact of getting the
peace prize on that situation? Does it
give you more protection because you
have a higher international profile, or
does it put you at more risk? I think it
it it certainly gave us a higher
protection, not only me, but also my
colleagues that are fighting around the
country. Uh because, as as you said, it
it brings the attention of the whole
world to a just, noble, courageous
fight. Uh and at the same time, you
know, it creates more pressure on the
regime in terms of increasing the cost
of repression that, you know, until
these days uh for years we've been
trying the world to understand, you
know, that the cost of repression has to
be increased. Maduro has felt that they
are totally, you know, they have no
cost. They can disappear, torture,
killed, and the cost will be zero. But
but the time of impunity it's over. So,
this is this has had an impressive
effect on on the morale of the
Venezuelan people. People are are
singing, uh cheering, celebrating, and
and and feeling that it is also a a
recognition that brings us even further
together. And yet, isn't there a move in
the last few days to strip you of your
citizenship?
Well, they have done everything you can
think about. I mean, this is this is
something that it's not only
unconstitutional, this is absurd. I
mean, uh but but frankly
I think it is a a a reflection of how
desperate the regime is, how weak the
regime is, and and the kind of mistakes
they're making, because this only
furthers, as I say, the the
consciousness of the world that that
that this is an urgent uh conflict that
has to be solved. And the US certainly
sees it that way at the moment, doesn't
it? We've seen this very striking move
in the last few months, the military
build-up in the Caribbean with the
world's biggest warship just the late
being on its way there just the latest
demonstration of that. I want to ask you
about the strikes the US has carried out
on boats in the Caribbean, described as
being strikes on on drug cartels. What
is your position on the deaths that have
happened in that way?
Look, Michelle, as I was saying, for
years we were, you know, asking the
world to understand
the degree of the threat and and this
devastation the Maduro regime was
building in Venezuela. I mean, Venezuela
has been turned into the safe haven for
the activities of all criminal
international networks, from the drug
cartels to the Colombian guerrilla, to
those groups that smuggle gold and
destroy uh communities of our indigenous
people and the ecology, to networks that
uh smuggle arms and even human
trafficking and child prostitution. This
is horrible what we're living. Russian
agents, Iranian agents freely operating
in Venezuela. Hezbollah and Hamas
being located in our country. And as any
criminal structure works, the
the moment you start, you know,
weakening them and they falling apart is
when you cut the sources of their and
the inflows of their criminal
activities. And we have asked for years
international community to cut the
sources that come from drug trafficking
and other criminal activities. Finally,
this is happening. So, you this you
think those killings are justified,
then? That's what I really want to
understand. Are they
or are they, as the UN would say,
extrajudicial killings?
>> This is about saving lives. And Maduro
is absolutely conscious, and he has been
warned what not to do.
These deaths are the responsibility of
Nicolas Maduro. He knows, and the rest
of the drug cartels that is in power in
Venezuela,
that they should stop these activities
uh in order to prevent more more deaths,
not only of the Venezuelan people, but
also from people all around the country.
And look, this is very important. We We
don't want war.
It was Maduro who started this war. You
are someone who stands for people's
rights, for the rights of Venezuelans,
for their democratic rights, for their
human rights.
What about the rights to due process of
the people who were on those boats?
I certainly defend the rights of
everyone, not only Venezuelans. That's
why why my voice has been, you know,
loud all along this process. But you
need to understand, they have all the
international community to understand
that this is a very cruel war. It was
Maduro who turned this into an
international conflict. Look, when you
when you face when you face
>> That's what I want to ask. Are those
people expendable on the boats? It was
Maduro who insisted
on maintaining operations that have
consequences.
It is Maduro that started a war against
other countries, knowing that that would
have consequences.
I am talking about this process is about
saving lives, millions of lives. That's
what we need to do. I mean,
we have been uh for years explaining the
degree of crimes against humanity that
take place in Venezuela and that need to
be stopped.
It is systematic, it's massive, it needs
to be stopped. Finally,
finally there is a reaction from
international coalition that is calling
things by their names. Maduro is not a
conventional dictator.
We are facing an narco-terrorist
structure that has turned Venezuelan
territory, Venezuelan resources,
Venezuelan institutions, and they've
turned them to to the to the favor to
the activities of a criminal cartel.
>> And this language you use,
narco-terrorism, this is exactly the
language that the Trump administration
uses about Venezuela. And President
Trump is saying after the boat strikes
that land will be next. Do you support
US military strikes on the territory of
Venezuela as part of what you call a
process? I believe that the increase in
pressure and the escalation that's
taking place is the only way to force
Maduro to understand that it's time to
go. And those that still support him,
which are are very few at this moment,
the top brass of the military, financial
enablers, you know, front men that are
making huge obscene fortunes with the
hunger of our people,
better understand that, you know, time
is running out. And I believe that this
escalation is the last opportunity for
those that still support Maduro to
understand that they need to put, you
know, aside, take all support away from
him, and Maduro himself to understand
that this is the last chance to to truly
facilitate
a peaceful and orderly transition, which
is what we want, which is what we fought
for.
Michelle, I I I I
ask you to understand
what we the Venezuelan people have done.
We've got over 35 rigged elections. We
finally demonstrated we won, and then we
were attacked. We've gone through 17
episodes of dialogue. In every single
one, Maduro has committed to certain
actions, and then he has violated his
the agreement. And also we have have
hundreds, thousands of protests,
peaceful rallies, demonstrations. And
every single time that happens, we are
fired. So, we've come and gone through
every single institutional means. But
which is exactly why
it seems that what you are still saying
that you would prefer a peaceful exit of
Nicolas Maduro seems so unlikely. Are
you actually saying you've reached the
point where you think this regime can
only be ended by US military force?
Well, that will depend on what the
regime does in the days to come.
I think it was absolutely indispensable
to have a credible threat. I think it
was absolutely required to cut the
sources of uh illegal activities because
those resources don't go to schools or
hospitals. They are used for repression,
for persecution,
and certainly for corruption, and also
for enlarging, scaling up their criminal
activities.
Who are you in touch with in the
administration? Who are you having these
conversations with most these days?
I I will not get into those details,
Michelle, for obvious reasons. Um I I
have to say and and insist that that
I've been in contact not only with
several officials in the US government,
but also in other countries, in Canada,
in in Latin America, in the Caribbean,
and certainly Europe as well.
>> who feels the most strongly about
Venezuela? The Secretary of State feels
the most strongly.
>> certainly believe uh the Secretary of
State, Marco Rubio, is one of of uh
the the the people in the administration
that better understand
the the threats [clears throat] that are
posed into Latin America and from our
region towards the United States. And
are you in touch with him?
I I I I I have been in touch with him,
of course, and with his team, and and
and I have to say even further in
Congress. Uh I on both aisles, you know,
in both parties, we have really good
friends and champions of our cause. This
goes beyond ideological issues. I mean,
it is certainly a matter of national
security of the United States and
national and and hemispheric security,
but it also brings
and I want to insist on this,
the biggest opportunity for democracy,
for stability, and for peace in our
region. You know, a transition to
democracy in Venezuela will not only
mean that we will stop the suffering of
millions of my fellow
countrymen that are dying as we speak.
Poverty in Venezuela today is 86%.
Pensions in Venezuela are less than a
dollar a month.
Our child or children go only twice a
week to public schools. I mean, this is
a whole generation that is growing with
hunger,
without education, and without their
parents because they have been forced to
leave. So,
>> Half the country, half the country
living in extreme poverty.
>> Absolutely. And so, we will stop the
suffering.
We will bring and and the and the people
is the main priority for us. We will
bring opportunities. We will bring peace
and freedom and respect and solidarity.
But at the same time,
Michelle, we will turn this criminal hub
in the heart of the Americas because
Venezuelan location is absolutely
unparalleled. I mean, for its strategic
um into a security shield and a great
ally of Western democracies. We will
dismantle these groups. We will get rid
of Russian, Iranian, and terrorist
actors in our territory. And we will
bring peace
>> big goals, and this what what you're
describing. I want to understand this.
Your conversations with the
administration, have they told you to be
ready
to become the leader of Venezuela?
Oh, absolutely not. Uh the leader of
Venezuela was chosen by our people a
year ago. We have a president who stood
in who stood in for you. Okay, but have
they told you to be ready for an
opposition president? Do you get the
feeling that
the US is about to bring about regime
change? Is that what you've been told?
Or do you think that the US is going to
bring about regime change?
>> no. I've not been told that, and it's
not regime change in, you know, the
conventional way
uh that we've seen before in terms of an
external actor
uh taking out a legitimate president.
That is not the case. First, because
Maduro is not the legitimate president.
He's the head of a cartel of the Suns.
He's the head of a narco-terrorist
structure. Secondly, because regime
change was mandated and proved a year
ago
on on July 28th, 2024. I I I I I It's
important to recall that we went into
election a presidential elections in
which I was banned from participating
after I won the primaries by landslide.
And uh and Edmundo González Urrutia
received 70%
of the votes, and we were able to prove
it. 24 hours later, we have the original
tally sheets, you know, published in a
super robust webpage that was
scrutinized and analyzed by the whole
world. So, the legitimate
president-elect of Venezuela is Edmundo
González Urrutia. Yeah, so this is not
regime change. This is enforcing the
will of the Venezuelan people. But you
see, you did all of that, and then
nothing changed. Nicolas Maduro declared
victory anyway.
And
what if again you are left in this
moment where there is no change, perhaps
because the administration changes its
mind?
And the previous approach to Venezuela,
the more pragmatic approach to
Venezuela, which is more into
the deals over the oil and more of the
exporting of Venezuelan oil, which
Chevron, a US company, continues to do.
What if you're left high and dry where
President Trump loses interest in
Venezuela?
Look, the thing here is that from every
perspective that you look at this at
what's going on in Venezuela, uh
it is convenient for everyone to have a
peaceful transition. First,
because one of the main concerns in the
region is migration.
You know, almost 9 million, a third of
our population, have been forced to flee
for survival. The minute Maduro goes,
millions will start planning and coming
back home. So, that's that's one side.
Secondly, from your what you mentioned,
from the security energy security and
business perspective, Venezuela is today
in the last place in terms of rule of
law
globally.
Last place.
Who is going to invest, you know, the
kind of of of of amount of money to
develop our opportunities under these
circumstances? You would have to
actually partner
with a criminal cartel if you invest in
Venezuela nowadays. One that has, you
know, confiscated and and and robbed uh
private uh
local and international companies.
Uh we have in Venezuela the largest oil
reserves, proven oil reserves in the
world, the eighth reservoir of national
natural gas.
Huge potential in electricity, gold,
critical minerals, and so on.
These can only be unleashed
with a with a society, with a government
that brings order to this chaos, that
open mar- open markets, that brings rule
of law, that is friendly to
international investment. And then a
country that is producing less than 1
million barrels a day could reach four,
five, or six in a decade.
>> Yeah, and I know your
prescription, your economic prescription
for Venezuela would be one of rapid
privatization.
But I look at these statistics of the
huge proportion of the country that's
living in poverty, people burning
firewood so that they can cook their
meals,
breaking up their furniture and burning
it.
And I have to wonder about the people
who might be left behind in a big
program of privatization,
perhaps creating an oligarchy in
Venezuela. How would you ensure that
that doesn't happen? That's a super
important point, Shell, because
the base of our movement have been
precisely
the most humble
and and vulnerable sectors
of society. It is impressive. You know,
I was told when we when we started the
movement
2 and 1/2 years ago, so we went back to,
you know, the most rural sectors, that
it wasn't possible to bring back
together a country that had been divided
by the by the Chavista regime in so many
dimensions, you know, racial,
rich and poor, black and and white,
those who live in in in urban areas and
those in rural sectors. And and we went
outreach out and tear down those
barriers around values, common values.
And you know what? The most single
strong
force and desire that bring us together
was we want our children back home.
Those that have left,
we want them back home. And that's a
long that every single Venezuelan mother
has today. And that's our mandate. So to
go back to your question, those people.
Yeah, but but but precisely what we have
to learn
is that system that Maduro has put in
Chavez in place, you know, this
social Chavista socialism. They do want
people to be equal, equally poor,
equally dependent on the regime.
They need people to be uneducated. They
They need people to live, you know, in
sadness because families are separated.
In order to have a country
to be able to to to compete and to have
opportunities for all, we need to invest
in education, in health, in social
opportunities, and of course we need
investments. We need huge investments
that will create employment in our
country. And I tell you, I I won my
primary process
with 93% and I was precisely
promoting these ideas. You know, to
defend private property, to give
opportunity to all,
to not let one child behind. And that's
precisely what's going to be, you know,
our priority.
>> President Milei in Argentina who
you have politically and ideologically
something in common with, you're both
from the political right.
What he is doing in Argentina involves
the free market, it also involves a lot
of austerity.
And Venezuelans, after suffering for so
many years under Chavez and Maduro, they
wouldn't be signed up to austerity,
would they?
Now, what we have we have called our
economy program is
a stabilization
and expansion, okay? Which means we need
to put first of all, we need to put
order. Currently, nobody knows what are
the level of Venezuelan reserves,
what is our debt, how much do we export,
what is our budget. It's a black box.
And we need to put order so that we can
open markets and create opportunities
for all. Certainly, in the first moments
of this transition, we will need to
invest,
you know, heavily, not only in
infrastructure and public services,
and health,
and water,
power, power supply, which we have
shortages today all along the country,
and certainly take care of the most
vulnerable
um sectors of our population, which we
have already identified,
and we have designed emergency plans to
have transfers, direct transfers to
these sectors that are in a critical
situation while the economy moves ahead.
If you get the chance and it is still a
big if.
If.
I'm still not sure what gives you so
much confidence.
Let me tell you something.
All my life, but mostly in the last 3
years, I've been told that everything we
were doing was impossible.
That, you know, we should simply should
give up and and accept that Venezuela
had been destroyed for good. That it
wasn't possible to get a country back
together with hope. That it wasn't
possible to carry out a primary process
without the regime stopping it. That it
wasn't possible to defeat Maduro and
even further to prove it. That it wasn't
possible to resist
these 15 months of the worst repression
we've seen ever.
And our people
have demonstrated such huge resilience.
But you have not overthrown him.
You have not yet overthrown him. You
have not overthrown him. That's right.
What are you planning to do within the
country next? Are you going to call
people out on the streets? We have been
organizing
these last months.
As we
built an
impressive
citizen network last year with over 1
million volunteers. That That's been a
case study so far for people in
different parts of the country in the
world that are, you know, asking us,
getting our advice, and learning from
what we did. And the regime didn't see
it coming.
Uh using technology, by the way.
And that's, you know, for for another
long conversation because it's
remarkable what we were able to do.
Now, these last months, we've been
organizing as well, you know,
underground,
uh taking,
you know, care of each other, finding
ways to communicate safely.
It's a totally decentralized
structure. I'm talking about hundreds of
thousands of people
in communication in real time
in order to assure that we will have a
peaceful transition. Because, you know,
I've heard so many concerns regarding
what this group might do or Maduro would
like or certain, you know, head of
state. And always they miss the most
important force here, which is the
people. 90%
of Venezuelan people are together. This
is the most cohesive cohesive cohesive a
society in the world without, you know,
racial, religious, social tensions. So
that the you know, the guarantee
that this will be
irreversible and stable is the people.
And yes, people will come out when the
correct moment arrives. And that's being
built as we speak. Isn't the fact that
you to achieve the peaceful transition
that you describe, you need the US
military, you need more of what is
happening in the region off the coast of
Venezuela, the drones, all of this kind
of US military pressure?
Well, I think that history has
demonstrated that that's correct.
We have gone and and and done everything
that ought to be done.
Uh we have been building
popular strength and organization, which
is also required. We have a legitimate
uh president who was elected by a
landslide. We have a united opposition
forces. We have everything and we are
ready to take over government. That's
very important as well. We have the
teams, we have the plans, we need what
we are to do the first 100 hours, the
first 100 days. And certainly, we now
need the international community aligned
with the United States because this is a
transnational conflict and operation. So
certainly, we need the international
community to act and apply law
enforcement. That That's another issue
that I It's important to insist. We have
been asking
Latin American European
uh governments to to this to have full
disclosure of all the information that
they have, and we know they have,
regarding the criminal activities of
Maduro and his cronies. And and I have
to say,
much of Maduro's resources and and
criminal resources end up in their
financial systems. So it is time for
these countries to move ahead. And
Europe has has been taking some steps
recently in this matter.
Do you think that Nicolas Maduro will
end up in a US court? He's been indicted
for some years now
on drugs related charges. When you spoke
to President Trump, is that what you
asked him for, to extract Mr. Maduro?
No, I'm I'm not going going to get into
the details of the operation because I I
I've never discussed that
with with the high officials. That's an
operation of the United States. I mean,
that's a totally autonomous independent
operation
of another country regarding their
national security. Uh regarding Maduro's
future, that depends on him.
We offered
and Mundo Gonzalez Urrutia, the
president-elect, and myself, the day we
won, and from then on,
the Maduro regime the possibility of a
negotiated transition
in which we offered
guarantees and incentives. They have
refused that on and on.
And instead, they have attacked us. So,
Maduro, as I said,
has very few time left to make up the
decision in terms of where he will go
next. Do you think part of President
Trump's interest is linked to his
beliefs around the 2020 election and the
allegation that voting machines
and people close to Maduro's circle were
involved in the the election that he
believes was wrongly believes was stolen
from him in 2020.
Well, on the first hand, I have no doubt
that
Nicolás Maduro, Jorge Rodríguez, and
many others are, you know, the the
mastermind of a system that has rigged
elections
in many countries, including the US. I
have no doubt about that. And they are
totally involved in wrongdoing in in
many countries. And I did I did I mean,
there is currently an investigation
going on in the United States and in
other countries as well.
I have no idea if that has or not any
influence in President Trump's decision,
but I will tell you something.
And a transition to democracy in
Venezuela will not only bring security
to the region, stability to the region,
it will ensure
energy security for US and other
countries because of Venezuela has huge
potential. We'll turn our country from
the criminal hub of the Americas into
the energy hub of the Americas, the
technology hub of Americas because we
will have cheap, reliable electricity in
in amounts that no other country can
produce right now in the region. But
most important of all, our people. We
will bring a country, a nation back
together. We will have millions of
family reuniting and turning this chaos
into an orderly, free, democratic
society. Did did this It is all about
peace. Yes, but in order to have peace,
you require freedom.
And we Venezuelans have demonstrated
that when you face a criminal structure,
you need strength to secure freedom.
It's a it's a very hard and painful
lesson, but believe me, this is
something we will inherit for future
generations.
I want to ask you about how you cope
with the lows because you do speak with
energy and conviction despite 15 months
in hiding and
despite you you saw an election stolen
from you at that moment and the regime
is still in in in power.
You face isolation from your family as
well, who are out of the country. What
keeps you going?
Well, I would say trust.
I have always trust
our people.
I have always trusted the conviction
and commitment
and love
that Venezuelan people
have demonstrated.
Um it this this long journey has turned
me into another person. Um I've learned
so much about my country, about myself.
Do you want to be president yourself?
Excuse me? Do you want to be president
yourself?
Well, of course, I've said that I'd run
for that, but but that's not my my
obsession right now. Believe me.
Um I I have one goal
and we will liberate our country. And
and and we will
make
these new generations and our children,
and I believe I feel I have millions of
children
absolutely proud to be Venezuelan.
Where do you think you'll be in a year
from now? Because even as I hear you
speak, I'm conscious that it's 27 years
since Hugo Chávez was first elected and
he was succeeded by Nicolás Maduro.
There've been many times along the way
when people thought this is the end for
the regime and it hasn't happened until
now.
Where do you think you'll be in 1 year?
I will be working very hard
in in building a country
that is going to be the brightest nation
in the world and it's going to be a
proud nation for what we went through.
And uh
I know what you mean.
This has been very long. We have had
opportunities in the past.
We have committed mistakes. We have
underestimated the regime.
Certain sectors left us alone or
betrayed us in the past, but
this is a totally different situation,
absolutely different. I believe finally
our main allies internationally
understand the true nature and the
urgency
uh for a transition to take place.
Secondly,
we have done legitimacy.
We won an election. We have, you know,
the will of the people behind us. Third,
the regime is weaker than ever. The the
fractures, defections, treasons within
the regime are growing as we speak.
And finally, I think the most important
thing,
we the Venezuelan people have already
decided to be free and to go till the
end. And this includes the military, the
police, which
you know, more than 80% of them
are, you know, joining and and will be
part of of this orderly transition as
soon as it starts. María Corina Machado,
thanks very much for talking to us
today.